Jason Fielder: Hi,
my name's Jason Fielder,
and I'm with GPU Software
Engineering team here at Apple.
We're going to learn
how to take advantage
of the awesome graphics
processing capabilities
of our new M1 Pro
and M1 Max notebooks,
and we'll be exploring the best
practices you can adopt
to make your applications
perform great on our GPU.
Our latest MacBook Pros
feature the most powerful chips
we have ever created.
The M1 Pro has
up to 16 GPU cores,
and the M1 Max
doubles that to 32.
This, coupled with much higher
DRAM bandwidth,
greatly increases
the performance
of the MacBook Pro.
The system memory
is now available to the GPU
thanks to our
Unified Memory Architecture,
and with up to 64GB available,
our GPU application is able
to access more memory
than ever before.
These MacBook Pros will open up
a whole new world
of possibilities for developers
and creative pros,
enabling workflows that were
previously only targeting
desktop machines.
So how do we open up this
new world of GPU potential?
We'll start with a recap
of Metal Compute,
which enables work
to be scheduled on the GPU.
Then, with an understanding
of the API and the GPU
architecture,
we will look at
the best practices
for each stage of your app.
Then we'll conclude with some
specific kernel optimizations
that you can apply.
Let's start with a quick refresh
of Metal Compute.
Metal is Apple's modern
low-overhead API
for performing GPU work.
It is designed to be as thin
and as efficient as possible
and provides a unified graphics
and compute interface.
Metal is multithread friendly,
enabling work to be
trivially queued from multiple
CPU threads,
and gives you, the developer,
flexibility to use
an offline or online
shader compilation pipeline.
Under the hood
in our hardware layer,
we have a CPU and GPU
both connected
to the same physical memory.
The CPU creates GPU resources
within the unified memory block,
and both the GPU and CPU
are able to read and write
to these resources.
We've a few layers
of API to work through
to see a kernel executed
on the GPU.
The top layer
is the command queue.
As per its name, this object
allows an application
to queue work for execution
at some points on the GPU.
The commands
are batched up on the CPU
through a command buffer.
These objects are transient,
and you'll create a lot of these
at the granularity that
makes sense for your app.
You may find this is imposed
by requirements around
CPU and GPU
synchronization,
but in short, you'll want
to ensure you have enough work
to keep the GPU fully busy.
To put instructions
into the command buffer,
we'll need
a command encoder.
There are different types
of command encoders
targeting different types
of work.
There's a graphics encoder
for 3D draws,
a blit encoder for copying
resources around,
but for this talk, we'll focus
on the compute encoder
for kernel dispatches.
With a compute encoder in place,
we're now ready to encode
a kernel dispatch.
Along with the kernel
function itself,
the encoder is how resources
needed by the kernel
are bound to it.
In fact we can encode
multiple kernel dispatches
to the same encoder.
We can change kernel,
or bound resources
between each dispatch
and also inform Metal
whether a dispatch
can be executed concurrently
or should be serialized
and executed
after the previous dispatch
has completed.
With our encoding complete,
we end the encoder
which makes the command buffer
available to either start
encoding a new encoder
or to commit the command buffer
to the GPU for execution.
Here we've encoded a total
of three compute encoders
to the GPU.
This represents a body of work
from start to finish,
and we're ready to instruct
the GPU to start executing it.
A call to commit
returns immediately,
and Metal will ensure
that the work is scheduled
and executed on the GPU
once all other work before it
in the queue has completed.
The CPU thread is now available
to start building
a new command buffer,
or perform any other app work
that's appropriate
while the GPU is busy.
The CPU is likely going
to need to know
when a body of work has been
completed, though,
so that its results
can be read back.
For this, the command buffer
has two techniques for us.
Here, before committing
the work,
the application can add
a completion handler function
that will be invoked by Metal
once the work has completed.
For simple cases,
there is a synchronous
method called waitUntilComplete
that will block
the calling CPU thread,
but here we're using
the asynchronous method.
So this is our basic
execution model.
One final feature of the API
is that multiple command buffers
can be encoded simultaneously.
Multiple CPU threads
can encode multiple
command buffers at once,
and commit the work
once encoding is complete.
If ordering is important,
either reserve the command
buffer's place for execution
in the command queue
by calling enqueue,
or alternatively,
simply call commit
in the desired order.
Use whichever approach
fits your application best.
With the possibility of creating
multiple command queues too,
the flexibility of Metal enables
an app to encode work to the GPU
in a pattern most efficient
for its needs.
So that's the recap of the
execution model Metal exposes.
Let's build on that
and take a look
at how to optimize for it.
We've a handful
of recommendations
on how your app
should access GPU memory
to take advantage of
our Unified Memory Architecture,
how to submit work to the GPU
to align with the compute model
we just went over,
and how to choose
which resources to allocate
to align best with our UMA.
First up to talk about
is definitely
the Unified Memory Architecture.
This set of best practices
is about minimizing
the amount of work
necessary on the GPU.
With a Unified Memory
Architecture,
the traditional management
of copies between system RAM
and video RAM goes away.
Metal exposes the UMA
through shared resources
that allow the GPU and CPU to
read and write the same memory.
Resource management is then
about synchronizing the access
between the CPU and GPU to
happen safely at the right time,
rather than duplicating
or shadowing data
between system memory
and video memory.
Working from a single instance
of a resource in memory
drastically reduces the
requirements on memory bandwidth
your app may have, enabling
large performance gains.
Where there is
possible contention --
such as the CPU
needing to update a buffer
for a second batch
of work while the GPU
is still executing
the first batch --
an explicit multi-buffer model
is necessary.
The CPU prepares content
in buffer n,
while the GPU is reading
from buffer n-1
and then increments n
for the next batch.
This allows you
as the app developer
to tune for your memory
overheads and access patterns,
and avoid unnecessary
CPU/GPU stalls or copies.
The limit on amount of GPU
resources an app can allocate
has two values to be aware of.
The total amount of GPU
resources that can be allocated,
and more critically,
the amount of memory
a single command encoder
can reference at any one time.
This limit is known
as the working set limit.
It can be fetched from
the Metal device at runtime
through reading
recommendedMaxWorkingSetSize.
We recommend you
make use of this in your app
to help control how much memory
you look to use
and rely on being available.
While a single command encoder
has this working set limit,
Metal's able to allocate
further resources beyond this.
Metal manages the residency
of these resources for you,
and just like
system memory allocations,
the GPU allocations
are also virtually allocated
and made resident
before execution.
By breaking up
your resource usage
across multiple
command encoders,
an application can use
total resources
in excess
of the working set size
and avoid
the traditional constraints
associated with
hard VRAM limits.
For the new MacBook Pros,
the GPU working set size
is shown in this table.
Now, for an M1 Pro or M1 Max
with 32GB of system RAM,
the GPU can access
21GB of memory,
and for an M1 Max
with 64GB of RAM,
the GPU can access
48GB of memory.
This is by far the highest
amount of memory
we've ever made available
to the GPU in a Mac,
and the new MacBook Pro lineup
offers greatly expanded
capabilities to users.
We're really excited to see
what experiences
you'll be able
to empower users with
and to experience
what they'll create with it.
That's our best practices
for working with UMA,
and we're ready
for our next topic.
At the command buffer level,
there's latency
with submitting it.
Small amounts of work
can lead to more time
spent waiting than working.
Look to batch
more encoders together
into each command buffer before
making that call to commit.
If your app spends time
waiting for GPU results
to inform what should be
dispatched next,
then bubbles will appear
in the GPU timeline.
In these bubbles,
the GPU is sitting idle,
waiting for the next
dispatch to arrive.
To hide this, consider using
multiple CPU threads
working on multiple pieces
of work
and keep the GPU busy.
Either by creating
multiple command buffers,
or by creating multiple
command queues.
For the kernel dispatches
themselves,
the GPU is kept busy by having
enough threads to work on,
and with enough work
within each thread
to justify the overheads
of launching it.
In our image processing
example here,
each pixel is processed
by a single thread.
When you can, increase
the number of total threads
in the kernel dispatches
to ensure all processing cores
of the GPU can be utilized.
Here, a single kernel dispatch
is used to process
the entire image
allowing Metal and the GPU
to optimally distribute the work
across all available
processing cores.
Finally, where you do have
and need smaller thread counts,
use the concurrent
dispatch model
instead of the default
serialize model.
We've observed many applications
that run great on M1,
but fall short
of their potential
on M1 Pro and M1 Max.
Submitting work in larger
volumes using these techniques
is an easy way
for your application to scale
and reach its potential.
The next consideration I want
to talk about are L1 caches.
Apple Silicon GPUs
contain separate L1 caches
for texture reads
and buffer reads.
With Metal being a unified API
across graphics and compute,
the full suite of texture
objects and samplers
are available to apps.
So if your application
is only using buffers
for its data sources,
there are performance benefits
to be had
from moving some of these
resources to textures.
This will allow
better utilization of the GPU's
high performance caches,
reduce traffic from RAM,
and increase performance.
Let's see what that looks like.
While the GPU accesses RAM
for reads of all resources,
there's a cache for improving
the performance
of future buffer reads to
the same local area of memory.
The cache is of a limited size,
though, and will fill quickly,
so older data that hasn't been
read for a while
will be discarded
to make way for newer reads.
Hypothetically, if our kernel
operated on a small enough
set of data,
once the cache is populated,
all future reads
would hit the cache
and complete with no stalls
or delays caused by
waiting for a system memory
loads to complete.
The bandwidth to the cache
is significantly higher,
and with lower latency
than of that to system RAM.
When reads miss the cache,
the calling threads will stall
while the read
is fetched from RAM
and placed into the cache.
Data reads become limited
by the system memory bandwidth
rather than the on-chip cache
bandwidth.
A kernel accessing large
amounts of data from buffers
can thrash the cache
in this way
and result in reduced
performance.
Apple silicon GPUs
contains a second cache
alongside the buffer cache
that's dedicated
to texture reads.
Applications can move
some of their source data
from Metal buffer objects
to Metal texture objects,
and effectively increase
the amount of cache space
and increase performance.
Also, texture data
can be twiddled,
and Metal will do this for you
automatically on upload.
Twiddling means the texels
are ordered more optimally
for a random access pattern
and can help improve
cache efficiency further,
giving another performance gain
over a regular buffer.
This is transparent
to the kernel when reading,
so it doesn't add complexity
to your kernel source.
Actually, textures are
a gift that keeps on giving.
Apple Silicon can also perform
a lossless compression
of a texture --
after it's been created
and when possible --
to further reduce the memory
bandwidth of reading from it,
and again, increase performance.
This, too, is transparent
to the shader kernel
as the decompression
happens automatically
on the texture read or sample.
A Metal texture will be
compressed by default
if it's private to the GPU,
but shared and managed textures
can explicitly be compressed
after upload
through a call to
optimizeContentsForGPUAccess
on a blit command encoder.
For lossless texture compression
to be available,
textures need
to have their usage set
to either shaderRead
or renderTarget.
Ensure this is set
on your descriptor
when creating
the texture object.
And if your texture data
is actual image data,
or being used in a way
where lossy compression
would be acceptable,
then consider higher
ratio lossy compression formats
such as ASTC or BC.
This will further reduce
both the memory footprint
and bandwidth utilization,
increasing the kernel's
performance.
BC and ASTC can both be
generated using offline tools,
giving a great image quality,
and have compression ratios
ranging from 4:1
through to 36:1.
With our work
now batched optimally,
utilizing buffers and textures
for our data input,
and being UMA aware
to reduce the amount
of copy work we're performing,
we're ready to look
at kernel optimizations.
All of these best practices
are aimed at increasing
your kernel's performance.
Let's take a look
at some of them.
I'm going to focus
on memory indexing,
global atomics, and occupancy
as areas of opportunity
in your kernels.
We'll also take a look at where
to look in our profiling tools
to understand
your kernel's bottlenecks
and how to measure
any improvements
any optimizations
may have.
At last year's WWDC,
our GPU software team
released a video on
Metal optimization techniques
for Apple silicon.
I'll recap briefly some
of that talk's content here,
but for complete details
and examples,
please do watch
that presentation.
First up, I want to talk
about memory indexing.
When indexing into an array,
use signed integer types
over unsigned types.
Here we have a for loop,
with count variable i
declared as unsigned.
Due to the wrapping
characteristics of uint
in the shader language spec,
this disables vectorized loads.
Usually, this is not
what you want,
and the extra code generated
can be avoided
by using a signed type.
And here, as the wrapping
behavior of int is undefined,
the load will be vectorized
and likely give
a performance improvement.
With the increase of GPU cores
and memory bandwidth
in the new MacBook Pros,
we have seen
the primary bottlenecks
of some GPU workloads
shift from ALU or memory
bandwidth usage to other areas.
One of those areas
is global atomics.
Our recommendation
is to minimize
the use of atomic operations
in your kernels,
or use techniques built around
thread-group atomics instead.
As with all good optimization
workflows,
profile your shaders first
to understand
if this is a problem
you're experiencing,
as moderate use of atomics
won't be a problem.
So how do we get this
vital profiling information?
By using the GPU frame
debugger inside Xcode.
It is a great tool
for this evaluation work.
It provides a wealth
of insight into the work
occurring on the GPU
and once we have our capture,
we're able to browse it.
The timeline view gives us a
great overview of our workload,
and shows us graphs
visualizing
the major performance counters
of the GPU.
Many of these counters
give both a utilization
and a limiter value.
Using ALU as an example here,
the utilization number
is telling us
that the kernel used
about 27 percent
of the GPU's ALU capabilities
during execution.
Other time was spent
doing other tasks,
such as data reads and writes,
making control logic decisions,
et cetera.
The limiter figure
means the GPU
is bottlenecked
by ALU utilization
for about 31 percent
of the kernel's execution time.
So how can the GPU be utilizing
27 percent of the GPU's
ALU capabilities
but be bottlenecked
by ALU for 31 percent?
The limiter can be thought of
as the efficiency
of the ALU work that was done.
It is the time spent
doing actual work,
plus the time spent on
internal stalls or inefficiency.
In best case,
these times are equal,
but in practice,
there is a difference.
A large difference indicates
that the GPU has work to do,
but is unable to do it
for some reason.
Complex ALU operations
such as log() for instance,
or using expensive
texture formats,
can result in underutilization,
and signify that
there could be scope
to optimize the kernel's math.
These two figures work
hand in hand
to help you understand
the general makeup of work
your kernels are performing,
and how efficient each category
of work is to perform.
With this particular kernel,
we can see that occupancy
is at 37 percent.
This value looks low
and certainly worthy
of investigation
to understand
if it can be increased.
Let's take a closer look
at occupancy.
It is the measure of how many
threads are currently active
on the GPU, relative to
the maximum that could be.
When this figure is low, it is
important to understand why,
to determine if this is expected
or signifies a problem.
Low occupancy sometimes
isn't surprising nor avoidable,
if for instance
your submitted work
has a comparatively
low number of threads
because the work to perform
is simply small.
It can also be okay if the GPU
is limited by other counters,
such as ALU.
However a low occupancy
coupled with low limiter
counters
signifies that the GPU
has capacity
to execute more threads
simultaneously.
So what may be causing
problematic low occupancy?
A common reason for this
is exhausting thread
or thread-group memory.
Both of these resources
are finite on the GPU
and shared among
the running threads.
Thread memory
is backed by registers,
and as the pressure
for registers increases,
occupancy can be decreased
to accommodate.
With a high thread-group
memory usage,
the only way
to increase occupancy
is to reduce the amount
of shared memory used.
Reducing threrad-group memory
can also help reduce the impact
of thread-register pressure.
There is scope for the compiler
to spill registers
more efficiently
when the maximum thread count
in a thread group is known
at pipeline state creation time.
These optimizations
can be enabled by setting
either maxThreadsPerThreadgroup
on the compute pipeline
state descriptor
or by using the Metal Shader
langauge
max_total_threads_per
threadgroup attribute
directly in your kernel source.
Tune this value
to find the balance
that works best for your
kernels.
Aim for a value that is
the smallest multiple
of the thread execution width
that works for your algorithm.
Let's go deeper
into register pressure.
When this is high,
we will see register spill
in Xcode's GPU profiler.
With this kernel example,
we can see that our occupancy
is at 16 percent,
and this is really low.
Looking at the compiler
statistics for this kernel
shows the relative
instruction costs of it,
including the spilled bytes.
This spill, along with
the temporary registers,
is likely the cause
of our poor occupancy.
We are exhausting
the thread memory,
and occupancy is reduced
to free up more registers
for the threads that will run.
Registers are allocated
to a kernel in register blocks,
and as such,
you'll need to reduce the usage
by up to the block size to see a
potential increase in occupancy.
Optimizing for minimal register
usage is a great way
to make impactful performance
improvements to complex kernels,
but how do we do this?
Preferring 16bit types
over 32bit types
increases the number
of registers
available to other parts
of the kernel.
Conversion between these types
to their 32bit counterparts
is usually free.
And reducing the data
stored on the stack --
for example,
large arrays or structs --
can consume
a large number of registers
and reducing them
is an effective tool.
Look to tune your shader inputs
to make the best use
of the constant address space.
This can drastically
reduce the number
of general purpose registers
being used unnecessarily.
And final tip is to avoid
indexing into arrays
stored on the stack
or in constant data
with a dynamic index.
An example of this
is shown here,
where an array is initialized
at runtime.
If index is not known
to the compiler at compile time,
the array will likely
spill to memory.
In this second example,
though,
index is known at compile time,
and the compiler will likely
unroll the loop and be able
to optimize away any spill.
Each of these techniques
will reduce the allocation
of registers, reduce spill,
and help increase occupancy
for more performant kernels.
For more insights into Metal
optimization techniques
for Apple Silicon,
do watch the WWDC 2020 video,
"Optimize Metal Performance
for Apple Silicon Macs."
And there you have it.
Let's review
what we covered today.
We started with a review in
the role of command queues,
command buffers,
and command encoders
to remind ourselves
about the submission model,
and how work is queued
to the GPU in Metal,
and we explored how to encode
Metal commands
from multiple threads to reduce
the CPU encoding time and cost.
With that knowledge,
we looked at recommendations
on how to tune
your applications;
avoiding unnecessary copies
to take advantage
of the unified memory
architecture;
submitting larger quantities
of work;
and using Metal textures
as well as Metal buffers
for our kernel's resources.
And finally,
we took a walkthrough
of how to use
our tools to identify
performance bottlenecks.
We understood how to interpret
the GPU's utilization
and limiter values,
and how we can tackle
problematic low occupancy
if we discover it.
Thank you very much,
and I hope you're as excited
as I am by what's possible
with the most powerful
MacBook Pro lineup ever.